Adding a tutorial section for binary caches. (#101)
spack/spack-tutorial: tutorial_binary_cache.rst

> .. Copyright 2013-2020 Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC and other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Copyright 2013-2021 Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC and other
```

   Spack Project Developers. See the top-level COPYRIGHT file for details.

   SPDX-License-Identifier: (Apache-2.0 OR MIT)

.. include:: common/setup.rst

.. _binary-cache-tutorial:

============================
Cache Tutorial
============================

> This tutorial will guide you through the process of setting up a

Reviewer: I'm wondering if up here there should be a very brief description of the differences between a source and binary cache so the reader knows which section is of interest?

source and binary cache mirror. Source and binary caches are extremely
useful when using spack on a machine without internet access. They
also can be used to speed up builds when using spack within a larger
development team.

--------------------------------
Setting up a source cache mirror
--------------------------------

When you run ``spack install``, spack goes out to the internet to grab
the source code for your package in order to build your packages. This
works fine on most clusters, but what do you do if the cluster in
question doesn't have access to the outside internet? This could
happen for a variety of reasons. Maybe you're building on a compute
node that isn't connected to the greater internet, or maybe even the

> whole cluster has been air-gapped from the internet.

Reviewer: "air-gapped" does seem like the right word, but I'm wondering if the layperson / average user is going to be familiar with it. What about disconnected or isolation from?
```suggestion
whole cluster has been isolated from the internet.
```

> Spack has an easy answer to this-- setting up a source mirror. When you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Spack has an easy answer to this -- setting up a source mirror. When you
```

use a source mirror, spack checks the mirror for the source code
before going to the outside internet.

> Building a source mirror is easy. Let's start with the same simple

Reviewer: This sentence (since it has "Let's") has me thinking that the next lines will show me how to do it, but it's more description! Are you planning on adding the commands? If not, maybe condense to not include the "Let's," e.g., "Building a source mirror is as easy as building our software on a computer with external internet access, and then creating a mirror from it."

> environment. First, let's build our software on a computer with

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should first demonstrate `spack mirror create <spec>` outside of an environment, and then show that it can be used for an entire environment as well?

external internet access.

Once we've built this environment, we can easily make a spack mirror

> that contains all the sources required for this build.

Reviewer 2: I would say "create an environment" rather than "build an environment", to avoid confusion between building the software and constructing the environment.

Author: The difference will be clearer here when I add in the commands.

When run within an environment, spack mirror create will upload every
source used to build the current environment to the specified
directory. We can configure spack to use this source mirror by adding
a few lines to your spack.yaml file.

This directory can be shared between users on a shared filesystem and
protected with typical unix file permissions. As long as spack can
read from the mirror directory, spack will attempt to read source
packages from the mirror instead of accessing the internet. This can
be a huge boon for computers that can't access the external internet
but can access a shared filesystem. If you need to use spack on a

> system that is air-gapped from the external internet, you must bundle

Reviewer: air-gapped is a cool word... hmm. Maybe earlier you can explicitly define it? "Air-gapped means that a computer or network is isolated from the internet."

the whole spack mirror directory and unbundle it on the air-gapped
system. From there, you follow the same steps to use the spack mirror
on the air-gapped system.

If you need to add more sources to the mirror, you can re-run the
command you used to create the mirror. For example, assume we want to
add bzip2 to our environment.

> 

Reviewer: Okay it must be the case that you are adding commands here?

Now that we've added bzip2, we need to update the mirror.

> Spack will skip uploading source code packages that are already

Reviewer: What about when a slightly different hash is needed for a build?

included in the spack mirror. Mirrors can be shared across different
environments, meaning one mirror can house all the source code needed
to build your team's dependencies.

If you're making a spack mirror on a shared filesystem, remember to

> fix the file permissions every time you update the mirror.

Reviewer 2: Setting your umask appropriately is another solution to this problem -- is that worth mentioning?

Author: Is that something spack can do for you in your configuration?  I doubt anyone will remember to set themselves globally in a bash script.  Generally you want your default umask to be quite restrictive, and then open it up as required for specific shared tasks.

Reviewer 2: It's not (maybe we should add that?). I think we should mention umask as an option, but we should still cover fixing them.

--------------------------------
Setting up a binary cache mirror
--------------------------------

If you're going to be setting up a team to use spack as part of their
development practice, you'll run up against the biggest disadvantage
to using spack: building all your packages from scratch is
slow. Recompiling the software dependencies for a large project can
take hours to complete. If every developer is rebuilding their own
software stack, that leads to a massive waste of computational
resources and a loss of developer productivity.

Spack has two ways to help alleviate this problem: chained spack
instances and spack binary caches. For now, we're going to discuss
spack binary caches as a way of solving this issue.

> A spack binary cache is made up of spack binary packages.  Each spack

Reviewer: Should this be a subsection more specific to setting up binary caches, in case the chained spack instance is added later? It feels like the start of a new section.

binary package, ending with a .spack extension, is a tarball of an
installed spack package signed with a gpg signature. When you install
a package from a mirror with a binary cache, spack

* Checks to see if there is a spack binary package that matches your
  exact SHA.

> • If a binary package is found, spack checks to see if you the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
• If a binary package is found, spack checks to see if the
```

  signature on the spack binary package is trusted.
* If the signature is trusted, then spack

>   * Unzips the spack package into your local installation prefix

Reviewer 2: Spack actually unzips it in a temporary working directory (in $tmpdir), does the relocations there, and then installs it from the working directory.

  * Searches all text files to replace the package builder's path with
    your specific local installation path

>   * Searches all binaries to replace the package builder's path with

Reviewer 2: Before searching the binaries, we replace rpaths using patchelf. That way we don't have to use the more difficult binary editing for packages that don't hardcode strings, and we can relocate short-to-long for those packages.

    your specific local installation path
* Otherwise, spack proceeds to build the package from source.

For the user, spack binary caches are transparent to use. Believe it
or not, you've actually been using a binary cache for this entire

> tutorial! As part of the preparation for this tutorial, we prepared a

Reviewer 2: They will know they've been using a binary cache already, we do the first install from source and then have them configure Spack to use the binary mirror.

The spack gpg command is needed to tell spack that we "trust" the gpg
key of the user who built the spack binary package.

Building a spack binary cache mirror has some gotchas, but is almost
as easy as building a source mirror. Before we build anything, we need
to modify the following line in our spack configuration file:

This change ensures that spack installs all our packages to a path
that is at least 128 characters. We need to take this precaution
because when spack installs a binary package, it replaces our path
with the user's installation path. For text files this replacement can
be done in place, but for binaries we need to make sure that all C
strings hard-coded into the binaries are large enough to hold the
user's eventual install path. We advise picking 128 because longer
strings sometimes cause compilation problems with some software
packages.

We also need to create a gpg key to sign all our packages.

We recommend backing up the secret and public keys to a secure place
so they can be re-used in the future.

With this setup done, we're ready to fill a binary cache with binary
packages. Binary packages are attached to an existing source mirror.

> We follow the same steps we used for the source mirror- making an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We follow the same steps we used for the source mirror -- making an
```

environment, creating the source mirror, and building the packages to
a spack installation with our padded path. After we've built our

> environment, we run the following commands to transform our built
> software into binary packages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
environment, we run the following commands to create binary packages from our build software.
```
The existing wording suggests that the installs themselves are permuted, but you keep  your install and get the binary

> Viola, done! Our spack mirror has now been augmented with a binary

Reviewer: I like this ;)

> Viola, done! Our spack mirror has now been augmented with a binary

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Voila, done! Our spack mirror has now been augmented with a binary
```

cache.  This cache can be used on systems without external internet
access, just like with a spack source mirror.  As always, remember to

> update the file permissions after updating the mirror.

Reviewer 2: Again, umask may be a better solution

-------------
Cache Summary
-------------

If you're using spack within a development team, consider setting up
source and binary cache mirrors. Source mirrors will let you replicate

> a spack environment on a machine without external internet access, and

Reviewer: "Without external internet access" might be a better way to describe it than air-gapped.

> binary mirrors speed free you from the burden of recompiling

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
binary mirrors free you from the burden of recompiling
```

the source code for your package in order to build your packages. This
works fine on most clusters, but what do you do if the cluster in
question doesn't have access to the outside internet? This could
happen for a variety of reasons. Maybe you're building on a compute
node that isn't connected to the greater internet, or maybe even the
whole cluster has been isolated from the internet.

Spack has an easy answer to this -- setting up a source mirror. When you
use a source mirror, spack checks the mirror for the source code
before going to the outside internet.

Building a source mirror is easy. Let's start with the same simple
environment. First, let's build our software on a computer with
external internet access.

.. literalinclude:: outputs/cache/setup-scr.out
   :language: console

Once we've built this environment, we can easily make a spack mirror
that contains all the sources required for this build.

.. literalinclude:: outputs/cache/spack-mirror-1.out
   :language: console

When run within an environment, spack mirror create will upload every
source used to build the current environment to the specified

> directory. We can configure spack to use this source mirror by adding

Reviewer 2: Here's a good spot to mention that the `mirror` command can work on individual specs as well.

be a huge boon for computers that can't access the external internet
but can access a shared filesystem. If you need to use spack on a
system that is isolated from the external internet, you must bundle
the whole spack mirror directory and unbundle it on the isolated
system. From there, you follow the same steps to use the spack mirror
as you would on any computer that can't access the external internet..

If you need to add more sources to the mirror, you can re-run the
command you used to create the mirror. For example, assume we want to
add bzip2 to our environment.

.. literalinclude:: outputs/cache/spack-mirror-3.out
   :language: console

Now that we've added bzip2, we need to update the mirror.

.. literalinclude:: outputs/cache/spack-mirror-4.out
   :language: console

Spack will skip uploading source code packages that are already
included in the spack mirror. Mirrors can be shared across different
environments, meaning one mirror can house all the source code needed
to build your team's dependencies.

If you're making a spack mirror on a shared filesystem, remember to
fix the file permissions every time you update the mirror, or update

> your ``umask`` settings so any new files you create have the

Reviewer 3: Should this link to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Umask or maybe https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/umask.2.html?

appropriate permissions.

--------------------------------
Setting up a binary cache mirror
--------------------------------

If you're going to be setting up a team to use spack as part of their
development practice, you'll run up against the biggest disadvantage
to using spack: building all your packages from scratch is
slow. Recompiling the software dependencies for a large project can
take hours to complete. If every developer is rebuilding their own
software stack, that leads to a massive waste of computational
resources and a loss of developer productivity.

Spack has two ways to help alleviate this problem: chained spack
instances and spack binary caches. For now, we're going to discuss
spack binary caches as a way of solving this issue.

A spack binary cache is made up of spack binary packages.  Each spack

> binary package, ending with a .spack extension, is a tarball of an

Reviewer 3: ```
``.spack``
```

installed spack package signed with a gpg signature. When you install
a package from a mirror with a binary cache, spack

* Checks to see if there is a spack binary package that matches your

>   exact SHA.

Reviewer 3: I would not use SHA here -- it's not consistent w/the rest of the tutorial.  I would say "exactly matches the hash of the spec you want to build" or something like that to indicate it's a spack hash

• If a binary package is found, spack checks to see if the
  signature on the spack binary package is trusted.
* If the signature is trusted, then spack

>   * Unzips the spack package to a temporary directory.

Reviewer 3: I'd simplify this to say that it unzips the file, then *relocates* it.  Then I would describe what relocation is, then have the stuff below in its own list as examples of what we do.

  * Searches all text files to replace the package builder's path with
    your specific local installation path.
  * Uses ``patchelf`` to replace all the rpaths in your binaries to
    point to your specific local installation path.
  * Searches all binaries to replace hard-coded C strings of the
    package builder's path with your specific local installation path.
  * Copies all these transformed files into your specific local
    installation path.

> * Otherwise, spack proceeds to build the package from source.

Reviewer 3: move this up and put it before "if a binary package is found" -- it's easy to lose this tiny "else" block in the details of the relocation.

Reviewer 2: Is that entirely accurate? I think we also fall back on source builds if the signature isn't trusted

Reviewer 3: Good point! Do we? I’m not sure what the actual behavior is

> For the user, spack binary caches are transparent to use. We've

Reviewer 3: Maybe mention here that with other systems (like `conda`), things aren't so seamless -- there are major differences between the workflows for source and binary deployments -- we are trying to enable you to swing between the two depending on your needs.

already demonstrated using spack binary caches earlier in the tutorial
when we set up spack to use a binary mirror. As a reminder, we ran:

.. literalinclude:: outputs/basics/mirror.out
   :language: console

Before we use a binary cache, we need to make sure that we trust all
the packages listed in the binary cache. If you're sharing files
between trusted users on a filesystem, you can do this with the
following command:

.. literalinclude:: outputs/cache/trust.out
   :language: console

> Here, ``-i`` means install, ``-t`` means trust, and ``-f`` means

Reviewer 3: Can you use long options for these?  It makes things clearer

force.  Together, this means download all the keys on the binary cache

> and trust them.

Reviewer 2: I think this section needs to be lower -- there aren't any new public keys for the user to trust at this point, but there will be later once they've created the binary cache.

              
Building a spack binary cache mirror has some gotchas, but is almost
as easy as building a source mirror. We'll start by making a new
environment for ourselves.  Since we're intending to publish to a
binary cache, we'll need to compile all these packages ourselves.
This can take some time, so we'll make a new environment with some
packages that compile quickly.

.. literalinclude:: outputs/cache/binary-cache-1.out
   :language: console

Before we build anything, we need to modify the following line in our
spack configuration file. Then, just to be sure, we'll initiate a
build of this environment and force ourselves to not use any cache.

.. literalinclude:: outputs/cache/binary-cache-2.out
   :language: console

This configuration change ensures that spack installs all our packages
to a path that is at least 128 characters. We need to take this

> precaution because when spack installs a binary package, it replaces

Reviewer 3: If you modify the section description of relocation above, you should be able to link to it here and say "recall what we said earlier about relocation" (or similar)

our path with the user's installation path. For text files this
replacement can be done in place, but for binaries we need to make
sure that all C strings hard-coded into the binaries are large enough

> to hold the user's eventual install path. We advise picking 128

Reviewer 3: You could just mention why -- specifically that the C strings can't be changed within a package, as the instructions for getting at the strings are embedded in the assembly code. We can't change offsets because we'd have to analyze all binary code and rewrite the program.

Might be worth mentioning that `RPATHs` are different because they're not used by the program; they're just ELF metadata, so programs like `patchelf` (link back to that line in relocation description) can modify them without worry.

because longer strings sometimes cause compilation problems with some
software packages.

We also need to create a gpg key to sign all our packages. You should
back up the secret and public keys to a secure place so they can be
re-used in the future.

.. literalinclude:: outputs/cache/binary-cache-3.out
   :language: console

With this setup done, we're ready to fill a binary cache with binary
packages. Binary packages are attached to an existing source mirror.
We follow the same steps we used for the source mirror -- making an
environment, creating the source mirror, and building the packages to

> a spack installation with our padded path. After we've built our

Reviewer 2: We should mention here that individual specs can be turned into binary packages as well

environment, we run the following commands to create binary packages
from our build software.

.. literalinclude::  outputs/cache/binary-cache-4.out
   :language: console

Voila, done! Our spack mirror has now been augmented with a binary
cache.  This cache can be used on systems without external internet
access, just like with a spack source mirror.  As always, remember to

> update the file permissions after updating the mirror.

Reviewer 2: Here is probably the right place to mention that we can host mirrors over https and s3 as well

-------------
Cache Summary
-------------

If you're using spack within a development team, consider setting up

> source and binary cache mirrors. Source mirrors will let you replicate

Reviewer 3: "source mirrors with binary caches"
